UNIT I 
The Multidisciplinary Nature of Environmental StudiesDefinition, scope and 
importanceNeed for public awareness.
Natural Resources :
Renewable and Non-renewable Resources: Natural resources and associated 
problems.
(a)Forest resources: Use and over-exploitation, deforestation. Timber extraction, 
mining, dams and their effects on forests and tribal people. 
(b)Water resources: Use and over-utilization of surface and ground water, floods, 
drought, conflicts over water, dams-benefits and problems. 
(c)Mineral resources: Use and exploitation, environmental effects of extracting 
and using mineral resources. 
(d)Food resources: World food problems, changes caused by agriculture and 
overgrazing, effects of modern agriculture, fertilizer-pesticide problems, water 
logging, salinity. 
(e)Energy resources: Growing energy needs, renewable and non-renewable 
energy sources, use of alternate energy sources. 
(f)Land resources: Land as a resource, land degradation, man induced landslides, 
soil erosion and desertification. Role of an individual in conservation of natural 
resources. Equitable use of resources for sustainable lifestyles

UNIT II
Ecosystems
Concept of an ecosystem. Structure and function of an ecosystem. Producers, 
consumers and decomposers. Energy flow in the ecosystem. Ecological succession. 
Food chains, food webs and ecological pyramids. Introduction, types, 
characteristic features, structure and function of the following ecosystem: (a) 
Forest ecosystem (b)Grassland ecosystem (c)Desert ecosystem 
(d)Aquatic ecosystems (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans, estuaries)
Biodiversity and Its Conservation
Introduction, definition: genetic, species and ecosystem diversity. 
Biogeographically classification of India. Value of biodiversity: consumptive use, 
productive use, social, ethical, aesthetic and option values. Biodiversity at global, 
National and local levels. India as a mega-diversity nation. Hot-spots of
biodiversity. Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, manwildlife conflicts. Endangered and endemic species of India. Conservation of 
biodiversity: in-situ and ex-situ conservation of biodiversity.

UNIT III
Environmental Pollution
Definition ,Causes, effects and control measures of (a) Air pollution (b) Water 
pollution (c) Soil pollution (d) Marine pollution (e) Noise pollution (f) Thermal 
pollution (g) Nuclear hazards 
Solid waste management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban and 
industrial wastes. Role of an individual in prevention of pollution. 
Disaster management: Floods, earthquake, cyclone and landslides.

UNIT IV
Social Issues and the Environment:
From unsustainable to sustainable development. Urban problems related to energy. 
Water conservation, rain water harvesting, watershed management. Resettlement 
and rehabilitation of people; its problems and concerns. 
Environmental ethics Issues and possible solutions. Climate change, global 
warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion, nuclear accidents and holocaust. 
Wasteland reclamation.Consumerism and waste products. 
Environment Protection Act 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act. Wildlife Protection Act. Forest Conservation Act. Issues involved 
in enforcement of environmental legislation. 
Public awareness
Human Population and the Environment,Population growth, variation among 
nations, Population explosion—Family Welfare Programme. 
Environment and human health 
Human rights, Value education,HIV/AIDS,Women and Child Welfare,Role of 
Information Technology in environment and human health. 
Field Work/ Case Studies 
Visit to a local area to document environmental assets—river/forest/grassland/hill/ 
mountain. Visit to a local polluted site—Urban/Rural/Industrial/Agricultural.Study 
of common plants, insects, birds. Study of simple ecosystems—pond, river, hill 
slopes, etc.